Mentoring Philosophy
====================

This is version 1 of my mentoring philosophy statement for the GMI. I suspect
it will change once I read the actual directions.

	Helping you become the person you want to be

You have joined my research group because we have a shared interest in using
computers to solve problems in molecular biology. Not a lot of people in the
world share this passion, and it is the first of several important bonds we
will share.

There are a lot of ways to be curious and useful in bioinformatics. Where do
you fit in? Our job is to figure that out. I say _our_ because we are in this
together. As the mentor, my role is to be your guide, advisor, critic, and
supporter. As the mentee, your role is to be curious, open-minded, studious,
and committed. We won't always play our roles perfectly. That's okay. We will
always be a work in progress.

I prefer to be honest and open about everything. So let's start off with this:
science is filled with difficulties. Projects will fail. Great ideas will be
abandoned. You will get scooped. Your paper/application will be rejected. You
will meet geniuses who intimidate the fuck out of you. Under these
cicrumstances, it is normal for mentees to feel overwhelmed and to question
their belonging. While _normal_, these feelings are also _undeserved_.
Scientists are particularly bad at self-evaluation and tend to undervalue their
contributions.

In my lab, science is more intimidating than most. You are entering a research
setting at the intersection of molecular biology, genetics, software
engineering, statistics, computer science, information technology, etc. Each of
these disciplines is difficult in its own right, and then you have to stitch
them together in novel ways. This isn't going to happen overnight. It can take
a while for you to experience the successes that will give you a feeling of
mastery.

So how are you going to navigate the complexities and difficulties that lie
ahead? How are you going to end up feeling a sense of accomplishment and
belonging in the harsh world of science? It starts with communication. We have
to talk. Often. And not just about the details of your next experiment. We need
to talk about your goals, both career-based and personal. You have chosen a
difficult path, and you will need some support along the way.

Speaking of _support_, what exactly does that mean? I think it means "research
friends": me, other professors, post-docs, graduate students, anyone who you
talk to about research. It doesn't have to be any more complicated than that.
In addition to your research friends, you should have other sources of support,
from your best friend in grade school to a therapist. No great athletes get
where they are alone. They all have huge support structures underneath them.
Scientists are like the athletes of the intellecutal world. We need support
structures too.

As your mentor, I am a critical part of your support structure. And believe it
or not, you're part of mine. We're in this together.
